Abstract.** Purpose. The modern control systems of dynamic interaction between railway vehicles and efficiently rails are based on indirect measurements of deformations, forces and vibration accelerations. Systems allow to find efficiently the faulty rolling stock making excess impact on a path. However, for their mass application on Russian Federation railroads it is necessary to resolve metrological issues. The work purpose is calibration technique creation of the strain-measuring way site and error estimation of dynamic forces measurement in system wheels – rails under train loading.Methods. Researches were conducted by a calculation finite elements method and experimentally in operation. The measuring site equipped with strain gages is created and the specialized loading device reproducing vertical force to 218 kN and side force up to 110 kN is developed. The rapid microprocessor strain-measuring «Dinamika3» system was applied to field tests.The terminating and element model with a variable average size of elements, equal 1 mm in the mid-range and 5 mm at model end faces is developed. The average size of elements, boundary conditions at end faces of model and a way of vertical force application on results of calculation evaluation is executed. Indeterminacies of results do not exceed 0.5%.Results and conclusions. Error sources of force measurement for a way of Russian Railway-2016 and a way of vertical force measurement by one pair of strain gages are investigated. Asymmetry installation influence of strain gages and a rigidity of the sub rail basis on accuracy of force measurements are established. The vertical eccentricity in pair of strain gages of 5 mm defines 5% an error that cannot be eliminated at a calibration stage. The calibration variations of the sub rail basis rigidity arising later lead to measurements errors by «RGD-2016» method at the level of 20–30%. For providing an error no more than 1% the necessary installation accuracy of deformation converters is 1 mm.Calibration of the measuring site of a way is carried out. The linear relation of the symmetric deformations in pair of strain gages at most with a coefficient of correlation more than 0,99 is experimentally proved. It is shown, that influence of side impact on a bias of vertical force it is comparable to a drift of zero strain measurement system and does not exceed 1%.Вестник Сибирского государственного университета путей сообщения. 2018. № 3 (46)