Abstract:** This research presents an approach based on artificial intelligence techniques for wheel
polygonization detection. The proposed methodology is tested with dynamic responses induced on the track by passing a Laagrss-type rail vehicle. The dynamic response is attained consideringof accelerometers installed on the rail and sleepers. This study, which considers an unsupervised methodology, aims to compare the performance of two feature extraction techniques, namely the Autoregressive Exogenous (ARX) model and Continuous Wavelets Transform (CWT). The extracted(PCA) applied to suppress environmental and operational effects. Next to data normalization, datadefective wheels. Finally, an outlier analysis is employed to distinguish a healthy wheel from a defective one. Moreover, sensitivity analysis is performed to analyze the influence of the number of
sensors and their location on the accuracy of the wheel defect detection system.**Keywords:** wheelset; dynamic analysis; wheel polygonization; wayside monitoring system; automaticSince its emergence, rail transport has been preponderant in developing societies’
living conditions. It is an effective and efficient transportation system for both passengers and goods, for small and large amounts of cargo, as well as for short and long distances .
In an increasingly interconnected world, there is a need to continuously update and expand these systems. Moreover, the significant increase in traffic speeds imposes a greater
dynamic load on structures [2–4]. In this sense, it is essential to implement methodologieslimitations , as well as for the detection of failures or defects at an early stage and,systems, distinguishing them based on the location of the measuring devices, both on the track and the vehicle. Installing sensors on in-use vehicles is useful for monitoring track component failures. For vehicle defects, it is common to adopt trackside embedded systems . Vehicle damage detection methodologies are mainly focused on detecting
damage on wheelsets and bogie components, as they have a greater impact on vehicle
performance and represent the highest percentage of maintenance costs .of data referring to all the operating vehicles, thus enabling the methodology to monitor various vehicles with a reduced number of sensors. Langnebäck pointed out that systems
applied to vehicles for detecting damage on the vehicle components are quite expensive,since sensors are required in all vehicles. Therefore, this method becomes economicallyby the damage to be identified. In addition, the substantial number of existing vehiclestechnology for detecting damage in each of them. In summary, despite the high precision for monitoring defective wheels, these on-board systems require a high installation cost to
In a wayside monitoring system, the wheel-rail contact interface plays a significant role.
At this point, the dynamic forces of wheel-rail interaction are established, which allows the acquisition of relevant information about various factors inherent to the traffic conditions .
Although these components represent a high maintenance cost, serious accidents with high economic losses and possible human injuries can be avoided. Regarding railway safety, wheel defects are one of the main causes of accidents , causing interruptionsreliability. Furthermore, these defects promote negative effects on both the vehicle and
Furthermore, wheels deteriorate over time due to wear and fatigue, which may develop various defects such as polygonization, flats and shelling, altering the wheel-rail contact characteristics and, consequently, causing greater impact forces . Although a polygonized wheel generates fewer effects on the track compared to a wheel flat ,promoted by this phenomenon. It also increases noise emissions inside and outside the vehicle, and decreases comfort levels and railway safety . Moreover, depending on thethe wheel, the vibration frequencies caused by the defect can induce resonance effects in the wheelsets increasing the vibration on these components . In the last two decades,
polygonization in wheels has been the subject of great interest in the scientific community.train wheels with harmonics of 1–20. In the research study by Cai et al. , the mechanism
of polygon formation on metro wheels was investigated based on experimental measurements and numerical simulations. Further, in the study by Peng , the mechanisms of
OOR formation on wheels were presented considering different wear prediction models.
Considering recent technological advances, it is now possible to develop and implement automatic methodologies for detecting and identifying damage in different systems [15–17] for railway applications. With the application of these intelligent techniques, it
is not intended to completely replace the visual inspections already used for many decades,
but rather, the creation of a compatible procedure. Traditional visual inspection and control techniques are expensive, occur at intervals, and are prone to errors, it is important to
motivate the widespread use of Structural Integrity Monitoring (SIE) systems, especially in
recent infrastructures or in systems of high value to society, as in the case of railway systems . Thus, it is essential to develop automatic methodologies for detecting different Despite the widespread research on railway defect detection, to the knowledge of the authors, the reported literature on automatic wheel polygonization identification has been limited so far. Therefore, taking advantage of artificial intelligence (AI) methodologies, it isan early stage. The detection of polygonized wheels is largely carried out using accelerometers mounted on the vehicle. The parametric power spectral estimation and adaptive chirpresults, but with flaws in polygonization detection in the early stages [19–21].
On the other hand, previous studies have shown very good results using waysidelearning in detecting defects in railway vehicle wheels, namely wheel flat detections .
This type of methodology usually presents the following steps: (i) feature extractionusing data from accelerations or strains measured on the track, (ii) feature modelingand operational variations, (iii) data fusion to merge different features and/or sensors information, and (iv) features discrimination to classify the defects. The studies carriedidentifying singular irregularities on the wheel surface (i.e., wheel flat). In this context, itcomprehensive number of damages, namely the ones that may occur along the entire Several methods have been used for feature extraction, which converts time-series
data into more condensed information, allowing damage to be more easily observed.
Symbolic data, continuous wavelet transform (CWT) [15–17], principal component analysis
(PCA) , and autoregressive models [15–17] are examples of effective techniques for
extracting damage-sensitive features for both static and dynamic monitoring. In timedomain applications where the measured quantity is acceleration, autoregressive modelson the system response, with the model parameters reflecting the properties of the system regardless of the sources of excitations. CWT and PCA have been developed over decades in different applications, in both time and frequency domains with various sensors. Despite this, they present some limitations, PCA does not consider the non-linearity of the data
and CWT adds excess redundancy to the data, and it has a high computational cost, so For feature fusion, several algorithms, including neighborhood-preserving embedding
(NPE) , neural networks , Mahalanobis distance , manifold learning methods , and kernel-based methods , have been recently employed. This data fusioninformation. Due to its simplicity and ability to reduce multivariate data, Mahalanobis
Recent approaches based on machine learning have been applied for feature classification to differentiate a healthy wheel from a defective one . Typically, two different approaches are used: (i) unsupervised methods, in which models are trained using labeled data under the supervision of training data, such as k-means , self-organizing maps
(SOM) , and cluster analysis; or (ii) supervised methods, in which models are not supervised using training datasets, such as Naive Bayes classifiers and k-Nearest Neighbor
This work aims: (i) to develop an unsupervised methodology to identify polygonized
wheels; (ii) to evaluate the performance of different feature extraction techniques concerning their sensitivity to the detection of wheel polygonization, specifically those based on
autoregressive exogenous models (ARX) and continuous wavelet transforms (CWT); (iii) towheel defect detection system. The unsupervised methodology to identify polygonized wheels consists of five phases: (i) data acquisition, (ii) feature extraction, (iii) feature The acquired track responses are influenced by parameters such as speed, irregularities, and load types. In this sense, different simulations of realistic scenarios of dynamicconditions. On the other hand, to overcome some unpredictable oscillations in the measured responses and consequent failures in damage detection, some options can be taken.
In more complex structures, such as bridges and viaducts, there should be a greater susceptibility to damage when compared to areas of track sections on the foundation ground. If the structures are damaged, they may camouflage or cause false warnings. In a practical context, the use of sensors in an area of the track less prone to damage and where vibrationmethodology. Aligned on these assumptions, the location of the sensors was chosen on aAfter defining the AI approach for identifying wheel polygonization, two distinguished feature extraction methods, namely ARX and CWT, are compared. To avoid
false alarm situations caused by environmental and operational effects, the latent variable method Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is applied. To reduce the volume of extracted data while retaining the most relevant information, as well as improve the ability to characterize the measured phenomenon, the data are merged using the Mahalanobis distance. As
a final step, an outlier analysis is employed to automatically distinguish a healthy wheel It should be highlighted that wheel flat identification was developed by Mosleh et al. ,
who demonstrated that the methodology is able to identify wheel flats. The validation of the proposed AI-based methodology herein, considering a polygonal wheel, is a clear step forward
in terms of the proposed methodology’s effectiveness, allowing for a complete implementation**2. Proposed Methodology for Automatic Wheel Polygonization Detection**(ii) Feature extraction from multiple sensor signals, by continuous wavelet transforms
(CWT) or autoregressive exogenous (ARX) models, that are separately implemented,
and their performances are compared; in this step, a time record is transformed intonot only normalizes the extracted features but also increases their sensitivity to damage.sensitivity. By using the Mahalanobis distance, the features from each sensor can be effectively merged in the first stage. Moreover, a new Mahalanobis distance is applied
again in the second stage to integrate all sensor information. The outcome of this stepDI identifies a healthy or a defective wheel; a statistical confidence boundary (CB) isIn this study, the features are extracted based on autoregressive models with exogenous inputs (ARX) and continuous wavelet transform (CWT) models. The performance ofthe occurrence of gearbox failures. The ARX autoregressive model considers the predictive behavior of the system at a specific location, considering its history at the same
point and the predictive response at other measurement locations, being defined by the### xj = ∑ aixj−i +### ∑ bkyj−k + ε j (1)where xj, yj, and ε j are the output, input, as well as error term of the model at the signal value j . Moreover, ai, bk, ma, and mb are the parameters and the orders of the output and Initially, it is difficult to determine the most appropriate ARX model order. The key issue is that higher-order models could better match the data, but they may not generalize
to other datasets. Otherwise, a low-order model is unlikely to capture the underlying physical system response. Several authors have noted the difficulty of defining a unique order for ARX models. The Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) is reported to be one of the most effective optimization techniques . Based on the exchange between fit accuracy and the number of estimated parameters, AIC measures the goodness-of-fit of an estimatedparameters, respectively, and ε is the average sum-of-square residual ( SSR ) errors. To find out an optimum order, one should examine a wide range of orders and choose the orderStudies conducted by Li et al. showed good results in gearbox fault detection.
CWT produces a two-dimensional set of coefficients from the analyzed signal. Although the Fourier transforms typically use sine waves as the basis for decomposition, other functionscan be selected for the wavelet shape due to signal properties. Two parameters define wavelet analysis: scale and translation. The CWT ( T ) of the signal x ( t ) is determined aswhere a and b are the scale and translation parameters, and ψ [∗] is the complex conjugate of the mother wavelet T that involves a continuous function in both time and frequency domains.
After the implementation of a CWT on the evaluated signals, a PCA is performed
followed by the extraction of four statistical parameters, resulting in significant data compression . Based on the p -by- q matrix X containing the extracted CWT features from the original signal evaluated by each sensor, where p is the measurement points number and q is the wavelets coefficients number, the principal components can be determinedwhere Ss represents the scores matrix, and T is a q -by- q orthonormal linear transformation matrix. In addition, four statistical parameters are extracted from the scores, Ss, including the root mean square (RMS), standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis. Thus, a matrix p -by- q is transformed into a k -by- q matrix, where k equals 4. Consequently, a total of k × qenvironmental and operational variations (EOVs). For example, in damage detection, itare mostly sensitive to damage . Therefore, implementing a latent variable method,
namely the PCA, may efficiently reduce EOVs influences, without requiring the direct measurement of those effects. According to Bro and Smilde , PCA is a powerful and versatile method capable of providing an overview of complex multivariate data. PCA can be used to find and quantify patterns, generate new hypotheses, detect outliers, or find
By considering a m -by- f matrix X, taking into account features extracted from the dynamic responses, where m represents the train passages and f represents the number of
features extracted from sensors (i.e., k × q ), a transformation to another set of f features, Ss,
is obtained by considering Equation (4). Considering the baseline condition, the covariance matrix ( C ) of the features is related to the covariance matrix of the scores Λ, as follows:where, Λ and T are matrices calculated by the singular value decomposition of the covariance matrix C . The columns of T are the eigenvectors and the diagonal matrix Λ, including
the eigenvalues of the matrix C in descending order. Thus, the eigenvalues stored in Λ areIt is possible to divide matrix Λ into two matrices with the first n eigenvalues and the remaining f-n eigenvalues. Determining the number of n -components is one of the
challenges in multivariate data interpretation. In this research study, n -components are
discarded when the cumulative percentage of variance reaches 80% . Once n
has been selected, Equation (4) can be used to calculate the f-n components of matrix S. The transformation matrix T [ˆ] is constructed by the remaining f-n columns of matrix T . Using
the following function, the f-n components can be remapped to the main space:where, FPCA is m -by- f matrix of PCA features which is less sensitive to EOVs. Every sensorindex definition, is easy to implement and fast to process . For each simulation, the MD is considered to calculate a damage index (DI). Several damage identification studies haveDI . The MD is a well-known distance metric because it measures the distance
between two points in a feature space containing two or more variables . Furthermore,
it considers correlations between variables and does not depend on the scale of the features.
It can merge features from multiple sensors by performing data fusion. Mahalanobis
distance (namely here as DI ) is calculated by the following function:in which, the inverse covariance matrix of the baseline simulation is defined by C [−] , and is a mean vector of the features from the baseline simulation. The test vector of f features
representing the potential damage is defined by xi . The covariance matrix and mean vector intend to incorporate the baseline simulation. Based on the data derived from the
damaged system, a new observation would be far from the average of normal conditions.
Mahalanobis distances are calculated for each sensor and simulation. A matrix containing m Mahalanobis distances for i sensors is obtained from the above calculations.To automatically monitor train wheel conditions, the methodology performs outlier analysis. In Meixedo et al. and Mosleh et al. , this tool proved to be very efficient in
classifying the data as being related to a scenario with or without damage. Mahalanobisspace. A Gaussian distribution can be used to approximate the Mahalanobis distance, and statistical thresholds can be used to analyze outliers. By considering a mean value and standard deviation σ of the baseline feature vector, as well as the significance level α, itconsequently, when DI is equal to or higher than CB, a feature is considered to be an outlier.In the present research, the Laagrss freight train composed of five wagons is studied.
According to the UIC classification, it can reach a top speed of 120 km/h . Each wagon has a tare weight of 27 t and can carry loads up to 52 t. A double freight wagon is shown incomponent. A rigid beam element was also used to connect the above-mentioned components. The numerical model of the vehicle is presented in Figure 3 and the mechanicaland geometric properties of the vehicle are detailed in Table 1. More details regarding the
numerical model of the freight wagons are provided by Bragança et al. .program, developed by Montenegro et al. . The model is based on a multi-layer scheme,
simulating the ballast, sleepers, and rails, as shown in Figure 4. The railpads, resting on the sleepers under the rail, are simulated as spring elements connecting the sleepers and
rail. The mass of the ballast is represented by elements of discrete mass points, while the
rails and sleepers are modeled using beam elements, adopting the appropriate material properties for each one. Finally, spring-dashpot elements are also incorporated to consider
foundation flexibility. Table 2 presents the properties of the track model.ties are very small, their effects on wheel-rail contact cannot be neglected . Therefore,In real conditions, the wheels are not entirely smooth and have imperfections. Despite
their small size, these out-of-roundness irregularities can cause extreme variations in the wheelrail contact forces, producing vibrations on the train and track components. A periodic radial
tread irregularity around the wheel circumference characterizes the wheel polygonization.
According to Peng , for wheel polygonization, the irregularity amplitudes should be higher than 0. mm. Inherent to polygonization, some parameters can geometrically characterize the phenomenon, such as the varying wavelengths (λ) in the function of the harmonic order (θ)Two groups of polygonal wheel profiles are generated for the numerical simulations,
one for undamaged scenarios and another for damaged scenarios, based on real wheel measurements, the irregularity amplitude spectra of which are presented in Figure 6.**Figure 6.** Wheel irregularity amplitude spectra ( Lw ) and harmonic order ( θ ) ( **a** ) initial polygonalFor the first group of profiles, the measurement data obtained by Johansson et al.
for new wheels with wavelengths comprising 20 harmonics were used . Thebetween 0.135–2. m, being the upper limit of the perimeter of the wheel. For the second group of profiles, the measurement values for four wheels with polygonal damage obtained
by Cai et al. were considered . The wheel pr i s are characterized by the
wavelengths in the first 30 harmonics, with the 6th to 8th harmonic orders being dominant.
Then, different irregularity wheel profiles are generated based on the sum of sine### w ( xw ) = ∑ Aθ sin [ψ] [θ]where Aθ is the amplitude of the sine function for each wavelength, which is calculated bywhere, as wre f = 1 µm. The wheel irregularity level ( Lw ) values are selected based on the
irregularity spectrums of Figure 6, for both cases: initial polygonization or polygonal damage . Considering phase angles ( ψθ ) to the sine functions that are uniformly and randomly distributed between 0 and 2π, several wheel irregularities are In the case of polygonal damage, simulating different amplitudes are applied atobtain two different damage severities in the function of amplitude ranges, one between
0. mm and 0. mm (a1) and the other between 0. mm and 1. mm (a2). Figures 7 and 8polygonal damage profiles, respectively. By observing these two figures, the difference inaround 0. mm and a damaged polygonal wheel with amplitudes between 0. mm and**Figure 7.** Example of an initial polygonization profile based on Figure 6a irregularity spectrum.**Figure 8.** Examples of polygonization-damaged profiles based on Figure 6b irregularity spectrumusing the in-house software VSI—Vehicle-Structure Interaction Analysis, which was validated and described in detail in the authors’ previous publication and was used in various of applications . In this model, the train is coupled to the track using a 3D wheel-rail contact model, using Hertzian theory to calculate the normal contact forces andsoftware. It is important to note that both subsystems are initially separately modeled in
models via a fully coupled approach . The full explanation of the properties of
track and train, including more details regarding train-track interaction, can be found in the authors’ previous publications . A graphical representation of the numerical model is shown in Figure 9. Note that the first wheel of the first wagon on the right side isA series of accelerometers are mounted along the track to detect a polygonized wheel.
According to the results demonstrated in Mosleh et al. , the location of the most promising sensors for obtaining good results is on the rail. However, the possibility of placing the sensors on the sleepers was also analyzed, since their installation is much easier. Using a virtual wayside monitoring system, acceleration measurements were
evaluated from 16 positions, as shown in Figure 10. In this figure, the numbers 1-to-4 andsleepers on the right and left sides, respectively, while the accelerations over the sleepers are measured by sensors located on positions 9-to-12 and 13-to-16. A virtual simulationautomatic wheel polygonized detection approach presented in this study. Once validated,Based on several speeds, loading schemes, and unevenness profiles of the rail, Table 3
summarizes the simulations of the undamaged and damaged scenarios. Baseline scenariosconsider vehicle speeds between 40 and 120 km/h, and four unevenness profiles are considered for rail irregularities . A total of six types of loading schemes are
considered: (i) a fully loaded train, (ii) a half-loaded train, (iii) an empty train, and trains with an unbalanced load in the transversal and longitudinal directions, namely (iv) UNB1,
(v) UNB2, and (vi) UNB3. In accordance with UIC loading guidelines , differentgravity is longitudinally and transversally offset. For baseline scenarios, 113 simulationswheels with initial polygonal profiles. Therefore, in addition to 113 analyses with healthy wheels, 30 scenarios are considered with three semi-imperfection cases, including: (i) the right wheel on the front wheelset of the first wagon, (ii) the left wheel of the rear wheelset of the third wagon; (iii) the right wheel of the rear wheelset of the fifth wagon. Furthermore,the front wheel on the right side of the first wagon as a polygonized wheel. These scenarioslow-pass Chebyshev type II digital filter. In addition, an artificial noise (5% of amplitude)response. An example of a comparison of measured responses regarding the passage of ashown in Figure 11a. The wheel with a semi-imperfection profile is located on the first wheel of the first wagon. This figure illustrates the similarity between the measured accelerations
in each case due to the similar amplitude of healthy and semi-imperfection wheels.
Acceleration time series at position 1 for damaged wheels are presented in Figure 11b,
considering two different amplitudes of wheel irregularity profiles. By comparing the results from Figure 11a,b, it is evident that the acceleration variation for the healthy wheel
is between − 1. to 2. m/s , while the defective one changes between − 70 to 100 m/s .**Figure 11.** Acceleration time-series on position 1 for ( **a** ) healthy wheel and wheel with semiimperfection profile, ( **b** ) damaged wheel.As the first step in the automatic damage detection method, damage-sensitive features are extracted from dynamic responses. As mentioned in Section 2.1, the ARX and CWT
models are implemented and their performances as feature extractors are compared.
To establish a suitable ARX model order, AIC values are ascendingly ranked from
1 to 70. An average AIC function is presented in Figure 12 based on 113 baseline analyses.
It is evident from this figure that after model order 40, the AIC values tend to stabilize,
showing that higher orders do not provide additional information. Therefore, the ARX models’ input and output orders are set to 40, and a total of 80 features are extracted. The
sensor installed at position 5 ( yj in Equation (1)) is used as output, while each of the otherof the features extracted by the ARX models is higher than the CWT method. Figure 13a(damaged scenarios) and more by EOVs (baseline scenarios). Aside from this, the figureand irregularities. In Figure 13b,c, a comparison of baseline and damaged scenarios shows similar variations in amplitude. In Figure 13d, the amplitude variation between healthy
and damaged scenarios is evident, as the amplitude does not change much for the first
143 passages, and then increases, which may indicate a wheel defect. Overall, the presenceregardless of the technique applied. Thus, the feature normalization step is implemented**Figure 13.** Feature extraction for sensor 1, ( **a** ) ARX–feature 3, ( **b** ) ARX–feature 36, ( **c** ) CWT–featureout to obtain indicators that are more sensitive to damage and less sensitive to EOVs. The Latent Variable Method PCA is applied for data normalization. As explained in Section 5.1,
for all 173 train passages, 3-dimensional CWT-double-PCA-based feature matrices of
173 × 468 are calculated for each sensor. At the same time, the ARX model is implementedsensor. Note that the PCA matrices have the same dimensions as the feature extraction step In Figure 14, the same four features shown in Figure 13 for sensor 1 are shown after
implementing PCA for all undamaged and damaged scenarios. During the modeling process, components with a cumulative percentage of variances higher than 80% are discarded. Therefore, the number of discarded rows is seventeen and two for CWT-doublePCA-based and ARX-PCA-based methods, respectively. The results obtained are quite
different depending on the method applied as a feature extractor. A reduction in theobserved in Figure 14a,b. However, CWT-double-PCA-based parameters in Figure 14c,d,
show a more effective normalization of the baseline features. Overall, both methods reduce**Figure 14.** Feature normalization for sensor 1, ( **a** ) ARX–PCA–based feature 3, ( **b** ) ARX–PCA–based
feature 36, ( **c** ) CWT–double–PCA-based feature 140, ( **d** ) CWT–double–PCA–based feature 266.To merge all the data obtained from the ARX and CWT methods, the Mahalanobis distance is implemented by applying a two-stage fusion process: in the first step, the
features from each sensor are merged and, in the second stage, the multi-sensor information is fused to enhance the sensibility to the damage. Therefore, in the first stage, Mahalanobis
distance transfers 468 CWT-double-PCA-based parameters into one column (173 × 1) for each sensor and train passage. At the same time, 80 ARX-PCA-based parameters are
converted to a single damage-sensitive feature (173 × 1). Figure 15 demonstrates theARX-PCA and CWT-double-PCA considering sensor 1. It is possible to observe that this process significantly improves damage detection sensitivity for both approaches.**Figure 15.** Features fusion for sensor 1, ( **a** ) ARX–PCA–based, ( **b** ) CWT–double–PCA–based.Afterwards, in the second stage, all sensor information is merged to improve the sensitivity to the damage even more. According to Figure 16, this step allows a clearand CWT-double-PCA). It significantly increases the possibility of effective automatic**Figure 16.** Sensors fusion, ( **a** ) ARX–PCA–based, ( **b** ) CWT–double–PCA–based.Despite the visual distinction between healthy and damaged wheels using data processing discussed above, strategies for unsupervised wayside monitoring should employhealthy states . Moreover, comparing the ARX and CWT methods is consideredthe most reliable results. The last step of the polygonized wheel detection technique is tofunction. The significance level of the threshold is defined as 1%, as it has been commonly(173 passages), Figure 17 illustrates the effectiveness of the proposed methodology for distinguishing undamaged from damaged scenarios. The results are evaluated for a set of
eight sensors (four on each side) located on the rail at mid-span between the sleepers. Theypositives or negatives using the CWT technique for feature extraction . On the
other hand, when the input signal is evaluated by the ARX method, two false positives are observed. Therefore, it is possible to conclude that using ARX models as feature extractors**Figure 17.** Automatic wheel defect detection ( **a** ) ARX–PCA–based ( **b** ) CWT–double–PCA–based.To reduce the time of installation and maintenance costs, it is necessary to obtain an
optimal number of sensors, as well as a suitable location to install them without compromising the quality of the detection. As a result, a parametric study is carried out using
accelerometers at distinct locations. In this analysis, only CWT is used for feature extraction because, as shown in Figure 17b, it is the best technique (with no false positives) compared(as presented in Figure 10) in terms of the total number (two, four, and six) are analyzed and the effectiveness of the detection methodology is demonstrated in Figure 18. The results concluded that even with two sensors (one on each side of the rail), the proposed**Figure 18.** Automatic polygonized wheel detection based on CWT technique considering: ( **a** ) sixIn the previous section, the proposed approach to detect a defective wheel from a healthy one was implemented for accelerometers located on the rail. This section validates
the methodology for accelerometers placed on the sleeper. Figure 19 presents results fromextraction considering eight accelerometers installed on the sleepers.**Figure 19.** Automatic polygonized wheel detection based on CWT technique considering eightthe results are shown in Table 4. For a minimal layout with two sensors, the methodologywhen the sensors are installed on the rail. Likewise, when the sensors are in the sleepers,
the results are also very good, presenting only one false positive and zero false negatives. It**Table 4.** False detections concerning the number of sensors installed in the rail/sleepers with theto improve sensitivity and involves: (i) acquisition of data from installed sensors; (ii) feature extraction from acquired responses; (iii) feature normalization to suppress environmental and operational effects; (iv) data fusion to merge features without losing information of wheel defect; and (v) classification of the extracted features into two subcategories: healthy
wheels or defective ones. As a result of this study, the following main achievements havei. the proposed methodology is robust and cost-effective for detecting wheel defects under real-world conditions. A healthy wheel can be distinguished from a polygonized
one, regardless of the rail irregularities, train speed, and train loading;ii. the methodology can successfully detect all damage scenarios without any falsea feature extraction; when considering the ARX model in the feature extraction, some false positive detections can be observed, which allows concluding that the use of this
technique leads to a slightly less efficient polygonized wheel detection;
iii. the system is always able to detect polygonized wheels despite the location of sensors in the track (rail or sleeper), which is a significant advantage regarding the
iv. the proposed methodology offers advantages over previous ones , as only two
sensors are sufficient to detect a polygonized wheel, reducing installation costs andIn summary, the achieved results demonstrate the high potential of this innovative application of data mining in the railway industry, especially for infrastructure managers.
As for future developments, the proposed methodology will be validated through
field trials based on on-site measurements. Furthermore, the robustness and efficiency of the methodology under distinct track environments, particularly in the presence of bridges,A.M. (Araliya Mosleh); Supervision, D.R. and C.V. All authors have read and agreed to the published**Funding:** This work was financially supported by Base Funding-UIDB/04708/2020 and Programmatic Funding-UIDP/04708/2020 of the CONSTRUCT—Instituto de Estruturas e Construções,
funded by national funds through the FCT/MCTES (PIDDAC). The paper reflects research developed in the ambit of the project Way4SafeRail, NORTE-01-0247-FEDER-069595, founded by
Agência Nacional de Inovação S.A., program P2020|COMPETE—Projetos em Copromoção. The
fifth author acknowledges Grant no. 2021.04272.CEECIND from the Stimulus of Scientific Employment, Individual Support (CEECIND)—4rd Edition provided by FCT—Fundação para a Ciência**Conflicts of Interest:** The authors declare no conflict of interest.1. Lagnebäck, R. Evaluation of Wayside Condition Monitoring Technologies for Condition-Based Maintenance of Railway Vehicles.
the 9th International Conference on Structural Dynamics, Porto, Portugal, 30
3. Vale, C.; Calçada, R. A Dynamic Vehicle-Track Interaction Model for Predicting the Track Degradation Process. J. Infrastruct. Syst.
ECCOMAS Thematic Conference—COMPDYN 2011: 3rd International Conference on Computational Methods in Structural
5. Alves, V.; Meixedo, A.; Ribeiro, D.; Calçada, R.; Cury, A. Evaluation of the Performance of Different Damage Indicators in Railway
Novel Efficient Technologies in Europe for Axle Bearing Condition Monitoring—The MAXBE Project. Transp. Res. Procedia **2016**,
7. Pimentel, R.; Ribeiro, D.; Matos, L.; Mosleh, A.; Calçada, R. Bridge Weigh-in-Motion system for the identification of train loads8. Pintão, B.; Mosleh, A.; Vale, C.; Montenegro, P.; Costa, P. Development and Validation of a Weigh-in-Motion Methodology for
9. Ni, Y.Q.; Zhang, Q.H. A Bayesian machine learning approach for online detection of railway wheel defects using track-side
15. Meixedo, A.; Santos, J.; Ribeiro, D.; Calçada, R.; Todd, M. Damage detection in railway bridges using traffic-induced dynamic
Bridges Using Traffic-Induced Responses. In Structural Health Monitoring Based on Data Science Techniques ; Cury, A., Ribeiro, D.,
18. Meixedo, A.G. Damage identification in railway bridges based on train induced dynamic responses, in Civil engineering.
Ph.D. Thesis, Faculty of Engineering of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2021.
20. Wang, Q.; Xiao, Z.; Zhou, J.; Gong, D.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, Z.; Wang, T.; He, Y. A dynamic detection method for polygonal wear of
21. Chen, S.; Wang, K.; Zhou, Z.; Yang, Y.; Chen, Z.; Zhai, W. Quantitative detection of locomotive wheel polygonization under
22. Mosleh, A.; Meixedo, A.; Ribeiro, D.; Montenegro, P.; Calçada, R. Automatic clustering-based approach for train wheels condition
24. Meixedo, A.; Ribeiro, D.; Santos, J.; Calçada, R.; Todd, M. Structural health monitoring strategy for damage detection in railway
bridges using traffic induced dynamic responses. In Rail Infrastructure Resilience ; Calçada, R., Kaewunruen, S., Eds.; Woodhead
26. Liu, Y.; Shi, Y.; Mu, F.; Cheng, J.; Li, C.; Chen, X. Multimodal MRI Volumetric Data Fusion With Convolutional Neural Networks.
27. Pan, Y.; Sun, Y.; Li, Z.; Gardoni, P. Machine learning approaches to estimate suspension parameters for performance degradation
29. Wang, J.; Xie, J.; Zhao, R.; Zhang, L.; Duan, L. Multisensory fusion based virtual tool wear sensing for ubiquitous manufacturing.
32. Nick, W.; Asamene, K.; Bullock, G.; Esterline, A.; Sundaresan, M. A Study of Machine Learning Techniques for Detecting and
36. Yang, M.; Makis, V. ARX model-based gearbox fault detection and localization under varying load conditions. J. Sound Vib. **2010**,International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery, Jinan, China, 18–20
the Royal Society A: Mathematical. Phys. Eng. Sci. **2018**, 376, 20170258.
40. Ribeiro, D.; Leite, J.; Meixedo, A.; Pinto, N.; Calçada, R.; Todd, M. Statistical methodologies for removing the operational effects
auto-encoders. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Conference on Prognostics and Health Management (PHM), Gaithersburg, MD,
46. UIC. Code of Practice for the Loading and Securing of Goods on Railway Wagons ; UIC: Paris, France, 2022.
wagon dynamic model in operating conditions based on limited experimental data. Veh. Syst. Dyn. **2022**, 60, 3024–3050.the Tenth International Conference on Computational Structures Technology, Valencia, Spain, 14–17
51. EN 13848-2 ; Railway Applications—Track—Track Geometry Quality—Part 2: Measuring Systems—Track Recording Vehicles.
52. Mosleh, A.; Costa, P.A.; Calçada, R. A new strategy to estimate static loads for the dynamic weighing in motion of railway
53. Peng, B. Mechanisms of Railway Wheel Polygonization. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield, UK, 2020.
59. Mosleh, A.; Montenegro, P.; Alves Costa, P.; Calçada, R. An approach for wheel flat detection of railway train wheels using
vehicles. In Rail Infrastructure Resilience ; Woodhead Publishing: Cambridge, UK, 2022; pp. 183–207.**Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note:** The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.