The railway transportation has a foremost significance in the world , the checking of the trains' movement state is of amazing noteworthiness to create the moving specialists and promise the ensured activity of railways . With the current enormous increments of train speed and axle load, forces on both vehicle and track on account of wheel flats or rail surfacemade have been diminished. This extends the consequence of early recognizable proof and change of these faults . Fault diagnosis in light of the examination of vibration signals has exhibited a marvellous enhancement, in perspective of the portrayal of mechanical system condition and allowing early recognition of a possible fault . Wheel flats are the most
generally recognized local surface defects in railway wheels. They can bring about cyclic wheel-rail influence in the midst of the running method, consequently instigating the coupled
vibration of the entire vehicle-track framework. This vibration in roll endangers runningWheel flat fault can express extraordinary harm to the rail, and additionally decrease the comfort execution . Because of the criticalness of this issue for railway framework, theflat fault . On the other hand, the use of some essential formulas to compute these forces could give vague outcome . In this manner, early analysis and mediation in railways is amazingly essential. There are many contact and contactless methods for condition checking and fault identification on the railway line . To plan the repairs of the track circuits in the
most productive and successful way, it is significant to detect and classify the faults as fast as time permits . Fault classification has been a subject of attention for a few years and as abetween these parameters and risk level . Then again, it has different disservices also. It isdifferent ways making analysis hard. In like manner, it requires lot of information and mastery to develop a fuzzy system. It doesn't give generalizable results and the program must be continuing running for each individual patient . To keep away from the issues we are using neural network, where are used and joined with various elements, with the essential
focus of get the best execution for the structure . Artificial neural networks have recently achieved best in class execution on a range of testing design acknowledgment assignments,
for instance, image classification and speech recognition. A part of the advances made in these regions can be associated with fault diagnosis issues as well, which makes the use of
neural networks an interesting choice in this area . The ANN is trained via experimentalMdSazzadHossain et al. 2017, had planned Radial Basis Function Network (RBFN)
for conceivable further enhancement in effect identification task. In generally speaking,
RBFN enhanced the effect localization and quantification accuracies by diminishing 32.98%Reza Rooki 2016, had anticipated pressure loss calculations in annulus is usuallyand extending pipe flow correlations. The predicted values utilizing GRNN intently pursued the experimental ones with an average relative absolute error less than 6.24%, and correlationHakanGuler 2014, had planned to demonstrate track geometry crumbling using a farline. The attained results demonstrated that ANN may be an option strategy for predictingS. Rajakarunakaran et al. 2008, had suggested the detection and diagnosis of faults inthe protected operation of the plant. That paper displays the advancement of artificial neural
network-based model for the fault detection of centrifugal pumping system.DimitrisSkarlatos et al. 2004, had recommended the strategy depended on vibrationearlier. The fuzzy-logic demonstrate stores the acquired involvement in a database and plays out the decision-making on damage extent and thus the need of preventive maintenance.#### **2. PROPOSED METHOD**This methodology investigates, diagnosing the defectiveness of railway wheels byincorporating AI system. These railway wheels defective has monitor via generated
vibration signals and need to prevent failure. A decade back, fuzzy-logic utilize to identify railway wheel defects by consider vibration level of the wheel, the frequency and the train velocity as input on other hand wheel condition as output. Following limitations such as arduous to design a fuzzy system, complex in deciding appropriate membership function,technique called ANN. It is a computational model inspired from human brain, comprised of a three layers; input layer, hidden layer and output layer to perform computational operation. To identify the railway wheel conditions via ANN, it is mandatory to have a certain quantity of database. Here, fuzzy logic employed to generate arbitrary (1000) database; amid 80% utilizeand their associate training techniques like LM, BFGS Quasi-Newton (BFG), Resilient Backpropagation (RP), Scaled Conjugate Gradient (SCG), Conjugate Gradient with Powell/Beale Restarts (CGB), Fletcher-Powell Conjugate Gradient (CGF), Polak-Ribiére Conjugate Gradient (CGP), One Step Secant (OSS), Variable Learning Rate Back-propagation (GDX),
Gradient Descent with Adaptive learning rate (GDA), Gradient Descent (GD), Gradient
Descent with Momentum (GDM) along with Radial Basis Function Network (RBFN),Network(ERBFN). In general, ANN consists of three layers namely input layers, hidden layers and output layer. Here, input layer have three nodes for vibration level, frequency and train velocity; hidden layer have single layer with ten associate neurons to transfer infermations; output layer has one node to exhibit wheel condition. The following sections##### **2.1. Feed Forward Back-Propagation Network (FFBN)**As made reference to ahead of schedule, the structure of FFBN holds three layers; in the midst of, input layer get data, computational process happen in hidden layer and finally output layer
out processed information. This structure execute with adequate database (learn by
experience) by training, the training stage of ANN can be either supervised (training with both inputs and outputs) or unsupervised (training with only inputs). This research used supervised
training to accommodate the prediction procedure. The input layer gets the data and multiplied to randomly corresponding weights. The products are summed up and the error isKota.Venkateswarlu, Dr.V.S.K .Venkatachalapathy, Dr.K.Velmurugan and Dr.A.Thiagarajandictated by comparing with the measured value. Back propagation is a sort of methodology that uses to train the model with the past output (feedback). Three significant transfer functions Tansig, Logsig and Purelin are usually utilized in FFBN here utilize tansigmoidtechnique. The foremost assignment of training FFBN is to determine the finest##### w  = arg min O p ( w ) (1)Where, w is weight matrix and O(w) is an objective function on w . O(w) is to be# =  Op ( w ) (2)##### O ( w ) = O ( w )## Op = 1  ( d pj − y pj ( w ))2 (3)#### O ( w ) =  [ d pj − y pj ( w )]#### =  [ d pj −Where ypj(w) and dpj are the predicted output and measured output respectively. The performance of FFBN is additionally founded on different components, for example, the number of hidden neurons, choice of training algorithm and activation function. The optimal number of hidden neurons was chosen dependent on a trial and error technique. MSE is##### **2.2. Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm**The LM algorithm is an optimization procedure which is an estimate of Newton’s technique,
more great than the gradient descent, however requires more memory. The LM update rule for
###  w = −( J T J +  I )− 1 J T e (5)Where J is the Jacobian matrix of the derivative of each error to each weight, µ is a scalar,
and e is an error vector. In the event that the scalar µ is very large, the above expression approximates to gradient descent; while µ is small the above expression becomes the GaussNewton technique. The Gauss–Newton technique is quicker and additional accurate nearer the
minimum error. So the point is to move toward the Gauss–Newton technique as fast as possible. Consequently, µ is diminished after each fruitful advance and expanded just when astep increases the error. The LM algorithm performs extremely well and its efficiency is#### **3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS**through different performance investigations. The standard measures utilize in this investigations are accuracy, False discovery Rate (FDR), False Negative Rate (FNR), False Positive Rate (FPR), F1 score, Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC), Negative Predictive Value (NPV), precision, sensitivity and specificity. The investigation results evident that
FFBN associate with LM exhibits superior results over contest techniques. The following##### **3.1. Performance investigation on training**performance of FFBN in associate with LM during training; the results evident best validating performance is 0.060151 at epoch 21 which is superior over other techniques in this context of predicting wheel conditions. This investigation includes training, validation and testing results along with best results. The following figure 3 shows the graphical representation of
regression and training state performance for FFBN associate LM training technique.Kota.Venkateswarlu, Dr.V.S.K .Venkatachalapathy, Dr.K.Velmurugan and Dr.A.Thiagarajan##### **3.2. Performance investigation on testing**while varying training and testing databaseratio. The investigation evident that by considering
80% database for training and rest for testing unveil superior results in most of the employed
techniques over other database partition. Amid, FFBN associate with LM exhibits proficient##### **3.3. Performance of AI techniques with standard measures**techniques with respect to standard measures. These performance measures calculate through True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), False Positive (FP) and False Negative (FN) values exhibits in table-1 and the mathematical calculation to evaluate AI technique shown in table2. Figure 5 and 6 illustrates the performance of AI techniques evaluate with different standard
measures exhibits the superiority of FFBN-LM over other AI techniques.Kota.Venkateswarlu, Dr.V.S.K .Venkatachalapathy, Dr.K.Velmurugan and Dr.A.Thiagarajan**Figure 5** Performance Evaluation of AI techniques w.r.t accuracy, FDR, FNR, FPR, F1-Score, MCC,**Figure 6** Performance Evaluation of AI techniques w.r.t Sensitivity and Specificity#### **5. CONCLUSION**condition diagnoses. Different standard measures are employedto evaluate the performance of implemented AI techniques. The results evident that LM technique associate with ANN
exhibits accuracy-0.975, FDR-0.05, FNR-0.05, FPR-0.016, F1-Score-0.95, MCC-0.933,
NPV-0.983, precision-0.95, sensitivity-0.95, specificity-0. which is superior performance over contest techniques. The proposed model diagnose the railway wheel conditions in four
classes, this consequently direct the need of preventive maintenance. This research further
Defect Modelling and Analysis by Time-Frequency Techniques. Vehicle SystemCai Yi, Jianhui Lin, Weihua Zhang and Jianming Ding. Faults Diagnostics of Railway Axle Bearings Based on IMF’s Confidence Index Algorithm for Ensemble EMD. Sensors,Yifan Li, Ming J. Zuo, Jianhui Lin and Jianxin Liu. Fault detection method for railway wheel flat using an adaptive multiscale morphological filter. Mechanical Systems andXiukun Wei and Jun Chen. Study on Wheel-Flat Detection Method Based on Vehicle
System Acceleration Measurement. Proceedings of International Conference onAlex M. Remennikov and SakdiratKaewunruen. A review of loading conditions for
Surface Anomalies Using FPGA in Railways. International Journal of AppliedTim de Bruin, Kim Verbert and Robert Babuska. Railway Track Circuit Fault Diagnosis Using Recurrent Neural Networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and LearningMoez Ben Hessine, SahbiMarrouchi and SouadChebbi. A Fault Classification Scheme with High Robustness for Transmission Lines using Fuzzy-Logic system. Proceedings of
International Conference on Advanced Systems and Electric Technologies, 2017, pp.256261.G. EmreGurcanli and UgurMungen. An occupational safety risk analysis method at construction sites using fuzzy sets. International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 39,SaniyaSirajGodil, Muhammad ShahzadShamim, Syed AtherEnam and UvaisQidwai.
Fuzzy logic: A “simple” solution for complexities in neurosciences. Surgical NeurologyS. Montenegro and W. Hu. Detection of Actuator Faults for an Attitude Control System
using Neural Network. International Science Index, Aerospace and MechanicalRen Wu, Shengen Yan, Yi Shan, Qingqing Dang and Gang Sun. Deep Image: Scaling upAwniHannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Greg Diamos, Erich Elsen, Ryan
Prenger, SanjeevSatheesh, ShubhoSengupta, Adam Coates and Andrew Y. Ng. DeepJafarZarei and JavadPoshtan. Bearing fault detection using wavelet packet transform of
induction motor stator current. Tribology International,40, 2007, pp.763-769.MdSazzadHossain, Zhi Chao Ong, Zubaidah Ismail and Shin Yee Khoo. A comparativeradial basis function network and multilayer perceptron.Expert Systems withReza Rooki. Application of general regression neural network (GRNN) for indirect measuring pressure loss of Herschel–Bulkley drilling fluids in oil drilling. Measurement,HakanGuler. Prediction of railway track geometry deterioration using artificial neural networks: a case study for Turkish state railways. Structure and InfrastructureS. Rajakarunakaran, P. Venkumar, D. Devaraj and K. Surya PrakasaRao. Artificial neural
network approach for fault detection in rotary system. Applied Soft Computing, 8, 2008,DimitrisSkarlatos, KleomenisKarakasis and AthanassiosTrochidis. Railway wheel fault diagnosis using a fuzzy-logic method. Applied Acoustics, 65, 2004, pp.951-966.Solomon Asante-Okyere, QiangXu, Rhoda AfriyieMensah, Cong Jin and Yao YevenyoZiggah. Generalized Regression and Feed Forward Back Propagation NeuralC. V. Vaidyanathan, P. Kamatchi and R. Ravichandran. Artificial Neural Networks for
Predicting the Response of Structural Systems with Viscoelastic Dampers. ComputerAided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, 20, 2005, pp.294-302.