Abstract: The maintenance and renewal of ballasted track can be optimized in terms of time and cost if a proper statistical model of track deterioration is derived from previous maintenance history and measurement data. In this regard, quite a few models with simplified assumptions on the parameters have been suggested for the deterioration of ballasted track. Meanwhile, data driven models such as the artificial neural network (ANN) and support vector regression (SVR), which are basic ingredients of machine learning (ML) technology,
the optimization schemes. For this purpose, the influential parameters of track deterioration have been selected based on the maintenance history, and two ML models have been studied to find the best combination of input parameters. Through numerical experiments, it was foundAuthor keywords: Track maintenance; Machine learning; Artificial neural networks; Support vector regression; Track quality index;Apart from the ballastless concrete track, the maintenance of ballasted tracks is one of the main tasks of infrastructure managers total maintenance cost (Guler 2016). During tamping, a multipletie-tamper is used to align the vertical and horizontal geometry of
the ballasted track, and both the regulator and the stabilizer are used
to improve the quality of the track. Meanwhile, the ballast is completely replaced by a new one when the renewal is planned in thefor individual papers. This paper is part of the Journal of Transportationothers, influence the deterioration rate of the track. These aforementioned parameters are normally categorized along the track measurement vehicle (TMV) are available. One of the main advantages of the data-driven model is that it predicts track conditions
track geometry including the number of tampings as well as regression results of TQI as a function of passing tonnages. A machine learning procedure specializing in ANN and SVR will be subsequently introduced, and the applicability of the models to the
will also be carried out. For these objectives, a commercial statistical package as well as a public domain library called LIBSVM
imported into the decision support system (DSS) within the framework of ERP or EAM (Lovett 2017), and future work will be concentrated on the combination of DSS with TMV and Internet ofEarlier applications of data-driven models to predict track deterioration can be found in Shafahi et al. (2008). They considered six
deterioration rates of rail, sleeper, ballast, and fastener. They applied one hidden layer in the model and studied the best combination of number of neurons as well as TQI parameters. Guler (2013)
Another application of the data driven model to track deterioration can be found in Hu and Liu (2016). They originally adopted parameters such as traffic volumes, track class, and inspection intervals. A more detailed application of the SVM to predict track classification were modeled by Gamma process, binary logistic regression, and SVM, respectively. In this case, the regression model purpose, differences in the measured track irregularities (amplitude), mean tonnage, time interval, and track identification number,
failure in the system. Since the measurement data of important railway equipment are stored on a daily basis in many cases, the corresponding prediction based on the ANN or SVM has to be updatedi.e., neurons, to model the track degradation realistically. For this,
first. Sadeghi and Askarinejad (2007) showed that the track deterioration could be represented by the combined effect of the superstructure, substructure, and track geometry conditions as shown
curvature, gradient, and cross level in the track deterioration model.
modeled during the ANN training and, as a result, the track deterioration rates were predicted using the field measurement data with The number of parameters mentioned previously could be reduced if our interest is confined to a specific high-speed rail route,
parameters of the track deterioration from the previous studies mentioned previously, and our interest will therefore be concentrated on
2002. The design speed of HSR is 350 km=h and the corresponding minimum radius of the circular curve is 7,000 m. The minimumIn our case, the assumption of the same properties within a specific route is necessary because the maintenance data including TQI were not available in our case, the corresponding data were obtained by assuming a deterioration model, and the deterioration rate
was subsequently estimated. For this purpose, the linear deterioration model (Lee et al. 2018) shown in Fig. was again used to represent tamping only (TO) and renewal and tamping (RT), respectively, and AL and WL mean action level and warning level,NT represent the deterioration constants and the number of tampings, respectively, and ri is the current deterioration rate. TheThe influence of the substructure in track deterioration can be established according to the type of infrastructure, such as a tunnel,ratio in Eq. (3) for each segment having a specific type of superstructure. Also shown in Table 1 is the length of each structure andthe plane section, and the length ratio is evaluated based on the total
length of plane section. As can be expected, the number of tampings in the segments of the competition curve are greater than those Detailed data on the number of tampings according to the magnitude of radius were not available and, therefore, the classification
presented in Table 2 will be used as a multiplier, χ, during the derivation of TQI for curved segments. It is noted that the maintenancecase, if the train speed is reduced, the deceleration force is applied model. The main difference between SVR and ANN lies in the usage of the kernel function in the SVR, which is similar to the transfer function in the ANN. In the SVR, the kernel function transforms
of tolerance, ε, so that the regression result will be insensitive to the
predicted value is deviated from the target value, y, at most ε for allof the high-speed rail are not available at this moment, and artificial
and the number of tampings shown in Fig. were artificially created using a random number generator. From these, the current
as multipliers, χ, in Eq. (3) so that the variations of the deterioration
rate owing to the influential parameters were obtained. Furthermore, perturbation on the deterioration rate was made by adding
shown in Fig. 7. As can be expected, when the perturbation parameter, κ, of Eq. (16) is increased, the deterioration rate becomes linear and the prediction errors will be decreased accordingly. Athe MSE or R value of the ANN and SVR models, and the prediction results of the ANN are a little better than those of the SVR,The ML model with the series of measurement data is next considered and, in this case, the measurement data of TQI and
Chang, C.-C., and C.-J. Lin. 2011. “LIBSVM: A library for support vector
Fumeo, E., L. Oneto, and D. Anguita. 2015. “Condition based maintenance
in railway transportation systems based on big data streaming analysis.”
Gibert, X., V. Patel, and R. Chellappa. 2015. “Robust fastener detection forhigh-speed railway.” [In Korean.] Ph.D. thesis, Chungnam National Univ.
Karlaftis, M., and E. Vlahogianni. 2011. “Statistical methods versus neural
networks in transportation research: Differences, similarities and some
Lee, J., I. Choi, I. Kim, and S. Hwang. 2018. “Tamping and renewal optimization of ballasted track using track measurement data and genetic
Li, D., A. Meddah, K. Hass, and S. Kalay. 2006. “Relating track geometry to
Li, H., D. Parikh, Q. He, B. Qian, Z. Li, D. Fang, and A. Hampapur. 2014.
Sadeghi, J., and H. Askarinejad. 2007. “Influences of track structure, geometry and traffic parameters on railway deterioration.” IJE Trans. B
Sadeghi, J., and H. Askarinejad. 2012. “Application of neural networks inShafahi, Y., P. Masoudi, and R. Hakhamaneshi. 2008. “Track degradation prediction models, using Markov chain, artificial neural and
Tabatabaee, N., M. Ziyadi, and Y. Shafahi. 2013. “Two-stage support vector
UIC (Union Internationale des Chemins de Fer). 1992. Factors affecting
UIC (Union Internationale des Chemins de Fer). 2009. Classification of