 (a)
(b)
(c)
**----- End of picture text -----**## 4.2. Data processingThe train’s dynamic responses may be influenced by different subgrade conditions of the railroad, such as ground, tunnel, and bridge. To eliminate the effects of different railroad conditions, the strain data recorded from the same railroad section**----- Start of picture text -----**
 (a)
TOC
(b)
TOC
**----- End of picture text -----**before and after lathing, are used in each scenario. In addition, the passenger loads in different trips are deemed statistically identical and the speed of train is assumed to be constant as in normal operation. Without loss of generality, the monitoring data respectively obtained from two typical railroad sections (1st and 14th) in the trip from Urumqi to Lanzhou are chosen to illustrate the proposed real-time defect detection methodology, which are from the strain gauge (MS3-7) deployed at the tubular crosspiece (Fig. 4b).For the sake of brevity, the monitoring data collected from the 1st railroad section are denoted as Case 1, while those from the 14th railroad section are denoted as Case 2. Firstly, the measured strain is converted to stress for the subsequent stress range calculation. For the strain gauges mounted on the steel surface, the conversion of the measured strain to stress is made by rs ¼ Ee, where E is the elasticity modulus of steel and e is the strain after eliminating the effect of varying temperatures. The equation of temperature compensation is defined as**----- Start of picture text -----**
**----- End of picture text -----****----- Start of picture text -----**
 (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
TOC
**----- End of picture text -----****----- Start of picture text -----**
 (a)
TOC
(b)
TOC
**----- End of picture text -----**where em is the measured strain, T m is the measured temperature in the vicinity of the strain sensor, T 0 is the temperature at the installation, and a1 is a constant coefficient. In our case, the original temperature is 4 , i.e., T 0 ¼ 4. The results of temperature compensation are demonstrated in Fig. 5. It is obvious that the trend in strain responses caused by temperature change has been eliminated.Afterwards, the stress ranges are extracted from the monitoring-derived stress data by the application of the rainflow counting algorithm. From each stress cycle, the stress range Sa is obtained by calculating the difference between the maximum stress rmax and the minimum stress rmin measured in that stress cycle, i.e., Sa ¼ rmax  rmin. More details on the stress ranges extraction are given in . The stress ranges with amplitudes lower than 1 MPa need to be culled because the majority are caused by noise. To decrease the uncertainty arising from the measurement facilities, the average stress ranges for every ten minutes are used as the target quantities. Due to the different lengths of the two selected railroad sections (1st and 14th), the traveling time of the train in each section is also different. This results in different data lengths. The data lengths of the average stress ranges in Case 1 and Case 2 are 110 and 90, respectively. Figs.  and 7 show the original measured strain responses before and after lathing in Case 1 and Case 2, respectively.## 4.3. Analysis results and discussionFollowing the implementation procedures mentioned before, the defect detection results for Case 1 are demonstrated in Figs.  and 9. Fig. 8(a) shows the average stress range (red point) together with 1-step ahead prediction (blue solid line) and the corresponding 90% prediction interval (grey shadow). It is observed that, although some observations at the time interval t 2  fall outside the 90% prediction interval, only the Bayes factor at time t ¼ 55 exceeds the established threshold of Hmin ¼ 10 as shown in Fig. 9(a). It is thus judged as an outlier (marked as h). The reason is that because when applying the proposed approach, the shift parameter is set as h ¼ 1:645rt, resulting in the uncertainty limit ucl ¼ 2:22rt while the other four observations are still within the uncertainty limit. On the other hand, Fig. 9(b)–(c) shows the results of the maximum cumulative Bayes factor and the corresponding run length for change detection. It is seen that the maximum cumulative Bayes factor values at time instants t ¼ 56; 57 and 58 are larger than the threshold of Lmin ¼ 10, while merely the run length at instant t ¼ 58 surpasses the threshold of lmin ¼ 4. Apparently, this observation at time t ¼ 58 fulfills the conditions of change-point detection causing an alarm to be issued (i.e., TON ¼ 58). The identified real occurrence time of change-point is t ¼ 55 (i.e., TOC ¼ 58  4 þ 1 ¼ 55), which coincides well with the actual time point of lathing the wheels. In accordance with the real-time identification of change-point occurrence, the prediction model is refined by altering the guessed mean value at TOC, as shown in Fig. 8(b). The predictions near TOC in the refined model obviously agree well with the actual observations, thus offering a better prediction performance than that of the original model.The results of defect detection by means of Bayesian hypothesis testing are illustrated in Fig. 9(d). The discrimination between ‘‘healthy” and ‘‘defective” is quantified by the logarithm value of Bayes factor. It is seen from Fig. 9(d) that the vast majority of logarithm values of Bayes factor before TOC are nearly zero and below the threshold level (dotted red line), which advocate the hypothesis of ‘‘healthy state” (no defect). This is consistent with the actual health condition and thus validatesthe capability of the Bayesian hypothesis testing. On the contrary, all the logarithm values of Bayes factor after TOC are larger than 2, meaning that the corresponding Bayes factor values exceed 100. According to the classification of Bayes factor stipulated in Sub-section 3.1, this result (H > 100) favors the hypothesis of ‘‘damage existence” and the damage severity is classified as ‘‘decisive”. Indeed, wheels immediately before being sent to depot for lathing were in the state of ‘heavily defective’. Making use of Eq. (21), the probabilities of damage after TOC are obtained as 100%, that is, the wheels are identified as defective with a very high confidence.The defect detection results for Case 2 are similar to Case 1, and are illustrated in Figs.  and 11. As seen in Fig. 11(a)–(c) no outlier exists throughout the whole period, but a change-point is identified, of which the time of notification is t ¼ 44 (i.e., TON ¼ 44) and the real time of occurrence is t ¼ 41 (i.e., TOC ¼ 44  4 þ 1 ¼ 41). The result matches well with the actual time point when wheel lathing is inflicted. For the predictions near the change-point, the modified prediction model (Fig. 10(b)) offers a better performance than the original model (Fig. 10(a)). As illustrated in Fig. 11(d), all the logarithm values of Bayes factor after TOC are larger than the threshold (dotted red line), whereas the values before TOC are within the**----- Start of picture text -----**
 (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
TOC
**----- End of picture text -----**threshold line. The values of Bayes factor after TOC are obtained to be higher than 100 (H > 100) and the corresponding probabilities of damage are approximately 100%, which advocate the hypothesis of ‘‘damage existence” and the damage severity is classified as ‘‘decisive”.Apart from the accuracy of the proposed approach, the computational efficiency is also of concern. The algorithmic implementation is performed on a Lenovo ThinkCentre M720t desktop (Lenovo, Beijing, China) with Dual Intel Core i7-8700 processor (Intel, California, USA) and 24 GB of memory. The computation times consumed in Case 1 and Case 2 are 4.0109 s and 3.7704 s respectively. In this sense, it realizes the detection of wheel defects in real time.## 5. ConclusionsA novel methodology for real-time defect detection of high-speed train wheels using Bayesian forecasting and dynamic linear model (DLM) has been developed and validated in this study. First, the DLM is formulated to approximate the actual stress range derived from the strain monitoring data and to obtain forecast distribution for next observation in the Bayesian framework. Afterwards, three metrics (i.e., Bayes factor, maximum cumulative Bayes factor and run length) are elicited for outlier detection and change-point detection. After the change-point has been confirmed, damage assessment is executed by the Bayesian hypothesis testing of the sequential observations before and after the change-point. Due to accommodating the dynamic evolution process and the statistical nature of the method, the proposed approach not only possesses the ability of real-time damage detection, but also enables damage quantification (through classifying the range of Bayes factor) and uncertainty assessment (through calculating the probability of damage). The methodology is illustrated by using the online monitoring data of strain from high-speed train bogies acquired under different wheel conditions (before and after wheel lathing). In the two cases addressed, wheel defects are successfully identified, hence validating the effectiveness of the developed method. The quantitative results about the damage extent and confidence would provide useful information helping to make cost-effective, risk-based decisions with the aim of maintaining the operation safety of high-speed rail.Despite the proposed methodology being developed for wheel defect detection of high-speed trains, it can also be applied to low-speed passenger and freight trains as well as extended to SHM for a wide variety of civil infrastructure (e.g., bridges, buildings and tunnels) when vibration signals are available via monitoring. In this study, the second-order polynomial DLM is employed to model the stress ranges, which only considers the change of stress range level and trend. However, most longterm SHM data, especially long-term strain monitoring data, are generally contaminated by trend, seasonal (cyclical) and regression effects, which require a more complex model. The Bayesian DLM enables the modeling of time-dependent responses of a structure by integrating appropriate components, for instance, the response with cyclical characteristics can be depicted by embedding a seasonal (cyclical) component. Thus, in accordance with the nature of monitoring data, an appropriate Bayesian DLM enabling to describe time series data of different features, can be formulated for damage detection of a variety of structures subject to different operational/environmental conditions.