intensively. All methods mentioned above are included as basic diagnostic methods in the corporate condition monitoring and diagnostic system designed by Association VAST. The system is being
introduced in the Northern railway. In particular the works on introducing drive motor currentvibration analysis. The works on introducing IR imaging are done for diagnostics during tests of the locomotive equipment in the modes of partial load as well as rheostat tests for locomotives.gear of railway cars and wagons in between of their repair and periodic non destructive tests. Theis used to control the condition of cars and wagons box bearings by wayside IR detectors. The task for other methods development and implementation including vibration diagnostic method is stated.cartridges. The stand had external roller drive. All the problems of roller stands for diagnostics of
locomotive running gear became vivid on this stand. The main problems are influence of non
circularity of wheels and rollers on defects’ diagnostic symptoms in bearing vibration. Besides it isone cartridge. Figures 10 and 11 present vibration autospectra and envelope spectra for boxbearings of a wheel pair cartridge where you can see all above mentioned problems. On figure 10frequency component is modulated by the rotation frequency of the wheel pair). On fig. you canroller rotation frequency component is modulated by both wheel pairs rotation frequencies).roller stand. Here Fax1 – rotation frequency of the first wheel pair, Fdr1 – rotation speed of the drive rollersroller stand. Here Fax1 and Fax1 – rotation frequencies of the first and second wheel pairs, Fdr1 – rotationWheel pair box bearings vibration diagnostics can be done on special stands in depots. In this case the wheel pair is removed from the wagon installed on special stand. We recommend conducting
diagnostic measurements during free run-out of the wheel pair. It is possible to use for this purpose a special diagnostic stand for test diagnostics of the drive motor rotor bearings. Figure 12 presentsBesides technical problem that can be solved in short term period, economic efficiency problems assystems for both running gear and auxiliary locomotive equipment diagnostics.main on-board equipment of the locomotive. Collected measurements can be downloaded and analyzed by experts in depot. To introduce such technology, the methods and requirements for such data collection and recording systems should be designed. If needed, the same systems can solve the problem of basic real time data processing and alarming. The more advanced data processing and
analysis algorithms can be implemented afterwards in depot by experts in diagnostics.
The work in this direction is on the way, as well as design of on-board measurement and data collection systems. Such systems can continuously record and monitor several operating and
secondary parameters in locomotive including temperature, electric, vibration ones and periodically recording raw signals in memory. As for the vibration parameters recording during train motion, it I1. Efficiency of locomotive running gear bearings diagnostics in locomotive depot can be
high enough to insure safety of locomotive operation, when the following problems are2. To introduce functional diagnostics of the on-board locomotive equipment is necessary to3. For diagnostics of railway wagon and cars box bearing on special stands, the stands should
be designed taking into account influence of stands on the bearing condition symptoms.
4. The on-board stationary diagnostic systems should be introduced starting with automatic
stationary data collection systems installed on the selected equipment. Measured data can be downloaded periodically to the condition diagnostic system in depot. It is recommended to
collect data related to vibration, electric current, rotation speed and temperature.
5. A special study should be conducted to find out if it is possible to conduct locomotive1. ALEXANDROV A., BARKOV A., BARKOVA N., SCHAFRANSKY V. - Vibration and
Vibrodiagnostics of Electrical Equipment on Ships, - Sudostroenie, Leningrad, 1986.2. AZOVTSEV Yu., BARKOV A., Yudin I. - "Automatic Diagnostics Of Rolling Element Bearings
Bearings", Sound and Vibration, June-part 1 and September - part 2, 1995,DIAGNOSTICS IN TRANSPORT INDUSTRY" presented at the COMADEM 2003 conference,