# Smart railways: AI-based track-side monitoring for wheel flat identificationand safety practices. AI systems can effectively identify geometric deformation in wheel rotation patterns, indicative of potential wheel flat damage, resorting to wayside monitoring systems and machine learning algorithms. This study aims to
propose an unsupervised learning algorithm to identify and localize railway wheel flats, which considers three stages: (i) wheel flat detection to distinguish a healthy wheel from a damaged one using outlier analysis, achieving 100 percent accuracy; (ii)
localizing the damage to pinpoint the location of the defective wheel through the Hidden Markov Model (HMM); (iii)
classification of wheel damage based on its severity using k-means clustering technique. The unsupervised learning algorithm iswheels and defective wheels with single and multiple defects. The proposed methodology demonstrated efficiency and robustness for wheel flat detection, localization, and damage severity classification regardless of the number of defectiveWheel flat detection, wayside condition monitoring, train-track interaction, damage localization, damage classification,damage railway vehicles and their components, compromising integrity and longevity. Thus, monitoring the geometrical quality of railway vehicle wheels to detect and
classify wheel defects based on severity is essential, particularly for freight trains. [–]novel solutions for the automatic detection and classification of out-of-roundness (OOR) wheels. OOR defects can
induce vibrations, damaging both track and vehicle components. These defects include flats, eccentricities, polygons, corrugations, missing tread material, and otherEngineering, University of Porto, s/n, R. Dr Roberto Frias, Porto 4200-465,implemented four unsupervised learning techniques: nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF), one-class support vector machine (OC-SVM), multilayer perceptron autoencoder (MLP-AE), and convolutional neural networkmachine learning technique for train wheel damage detection and condition assessment, providing more accurateproposed methodology for wheel flat detection are evaluated, assuming train passages with both single and multiple damaged wheel localized, even for a single defect. Additionally, the distinction between train passages with a singleregardless of the position or number of defects. The proposed methodology can classify the severity of wheel flatsof the number of defects per train passage and position of the damage.in-house software Vehicle-Structure-Interaction (VSI), allowing the generation of synthetic measurement responses.detail in the study of Montenegro and Calçada. This numerical tool, developed in MATLAB, imports the structuralstudies, the proposed methodology can detect wheel flat regardless of the number and position of the accelerometersand left rails. The accelerometers on the right side are identified by measurement points 1 to 4. Additionally, the accelerometers located on the left side of the track are
represented by measurement points 5 to 8. The distance between the accelerometers is considered equal to 0. m.establish a confidence boundary, while the second stage localizes the defective wheels and distinguishes single-damageContinuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) to convert timeseries data into damage-sensitive features. Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) then mitigates environmental and operational effects on vibration characteristics. PCA is used to reduce model orders, performmultivariate data to a single DI. MD measures the similarity between undamaged and damaged features;
enhances damage sensitivity for CWT-PCA-based features. An unsupervised discrimination algorithm definesoutlier analysis. Mahalanobis squared distance is approximated by chi-squared distributions, allowing aother works. [,][,] Finally, defective scenarios are identified and used to localize damaged wheels. [,]states. The Baum-Welch algorithm deduces model parameters using an Expectation-Maximization strategy, while theto the associated wheel, enhancing the examination of wheelrail interactions and pinpointing specific points for comparing
patterns across wheel movements. Gaussian emissions between 2 and 5 states were considered for adjusting hyperparameters, with a 3-state HMM chosen for segmentation as itThe segmentation captures three phases of a wheel’s movement: approach, detection, and departure from the sensor. ThisTrain Freight – Laagrss wagon Freight – Laagrss wagon Freight – Laagrss wagonterm, β represents the coefficient for the sparsity regularization term and ρ denotes the average desired informationidentical and escalate as they move further apart. Minimizing the cost function makes this term small; therefore, ρError (MSE) and Mean Absolute Error (MAE) are computed between original CWT-based features yj and reconstructed ones byj as new features by equations (4) and (5),the original CWT-based damage-sensitive feature response data, byj represents jth element in the reconstructedIn order to test and validate the automatic wheel flat identification method developed in this study, baseline (undamaged)and, (iii) flats in the left wheel of the rear wheels of the first andextraction; (b) feature normalisation; (c) data fusion; (d) outlier analysis.and second wagons (train passages 31, 32, and 33), identified as far-multi-damaged ), as well as for both
near-multi-damaged ). Additionally, six analyses examine two defective wheels with different severities, including low and moderate, low and severe, andStandard EN 13848-2, rail unevenness profiles are generated for wavelengths between 1 m and 75 m. Using actual data, PSD curves are developed to create artificial unevenness profiles. An overview of how unevenness profilesFor the baseline scenario, 113 simulations are performed, as shown in Figure 4, by considering fourthe second stage. Finally, damage classification is performed based on the defect severity.wheel flat detection: feature extraction, feature normalization, data fusion, and outlier analysis .From time series data, 468 features are extracted per accelerometer as damage-sensitive indicators. The analysis includesbaseline and damage scenarios is observed due to environmental and operational factors, leading to feature(a1, b1) axle 1; (a2, b2) axles 2–3; (a3, b3) axles 4–5; (a4, b4) axles 6–7; (a5, b5) axles 8–9 (a6, b6) axle 10.single-damage scenarios, distinguishing between undamaged and damaged wheels after PCA is not possible.Figure 6(c) shows improved damage sensitivity at accelerometer 5, with varying sensitivities across the sensor,wheels in real-time. Once the confidence boundary is established, a single passage with defective wheel is sufficient to test the accuracy of the proposed methodology. This methodology effectively detects all damage scenarios without falsedefective wheels. As described in section 3, damage localization is performed based on the segmentation techniquemovement. Although other segmentations effectively conformed to the shape of the monitoring signal, they provedwheel signal segments between wheel movements. Additionally, it can be noted that the proposed methodology forwheel individually. The segmentation method currently employed divides the signal into segments, each representing twoFigure 7 illustrates the acquired acceleration from accelerometer 1 ) for train passage without defective wheel. Figure 7(a) represents the complete signalshown in these figures, when the train is passing considering all wheels in healthy condition, the measured acceleration does represent any impact and significant peak.multi-damage scenarios using measured acceleration on position 1 ). Figure 8(a) illustrates the measuredsegmented acceleration signal for the first and last axles, respectively, while Figure 8(a)2-5 represent the signal for theshown in Figure 8(b)1,6, accelerometer 1 detects two significant peaks, the first at the first axle and the second at the lastaccelerometers: (a) accelerometer 1, (b) accelerometer 5, (c) all accelerometers.that a wheel flat causes a significant lag in acceleration amplitude across different axles, whereas healthy wheels show insignificant lag. The difference in acceleration peak amplitude between healthy and defective scenarios further helps
wheels exhibit higher acceleration peaks than healthy scenarios 1,6 compared to Figure 7(b) and (g)).these axles. By comparing the frequency data from individual axles 1,6) and paired axles 2on the first and last wagons. This is identified using segmented measured acceleration in the frequency domain.methodology involves the extraction of features using Continuous Wavelet Transform, application of autoencoder, andphase. The implemented SAE is designed considering a coefficient for the regularization term (λ), the coefficient for theconsidering segmented responses obtained from each accelerometer. As shown in this figure, the damaged scenarios remaining 24 indicators correspond to multi-damage scenarios involving two defective wheels. As indicated inlow damage severity (10–20 mm), leading to this misclassification. Conversely, the second misclassificationunsupervised methodology is capable of classifying damage severities into three classes namely, low, moderate, andsevere intensity by yellow, blue and, green indicators respectively, considering both single and multi-damage scenarios with admissible accuracy.for the first wheel of the first wagon considering accelerometers 1 and 5, which includes 6 low damage severity andfor the second wheel of the second wagon considering accelerometers 1 and 5, which includes 1 low damage severitydamage and the clustering analysis comes with reliable performance while the defect is located on the second wagon.As represented in Figure 1(b) and (c), two layouts are considered to simulate scenarios with multi-damaged wheels.This research study presents an unsupervised discrimination algorithm for detecting, localizing and classifying trainmultiple defects. The proposed methodology provides efficiency and robustness for damage identification and localization regardless of the number of defective wheels and⁃ defective wheels can be localized by segmented acceleration signals corresponding to single axles (firstbased on their severity (low, moderate, and severe) regardless of whether the train has single or multipleThe author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: ThisStimulus of Scientific Employment, Individual Support (CEECIND) - 4rd Edition provided by “FCT – Fundação para a Ciencia,ˆ
Recovery and Resilience Plan (PRR) and by European Union NextGeneration EU”.