larger than 0.2mm (Peng, 2020) - Various suspension, material, machining or prematurely (Fröhling et al., 2019)track factors(Fröhling et al., 2019) - In high-speed, the vehicle's safety potentially be jeopardized (Xiaoyi et al., 2018)Wheel - Circular tread defect of periodic small - During tread braking, hot spots arise in some - The energy (covariance) of vertical acceleration signals of corrugation wheel is 2-5 times
roughness deviation (Bracciali & Cascini, 1997) regions. When the cooling phase, it will higher than normal wheel (Bracciali & Cascini, 1997)
(corrugation) - Defect properties for wavelength is from generate valleys and corrugation pattern (J. - The movement of a corrugated wheel along the track generates acoustic waves as a resultwheelset imbalance, material hardness, selfinduced vibration, and wheel flat(Peng, 2020)Nielsen, 2009) of the vibration caused by the ridges and valleys on the tread (Bracciali & Cascini, 1997)
µm (Peng, 2020) - Increasing dynamic load and produce wavy motion in vertical (Srivastava et al., 2016).Stochastic - Circular tread defects with non-periodic - Irregular wear or damage to the wheel tread, - Effects two parameters in vertical displacement irregularity which are increasing the
(non-periodic) intervals (Peng, 2020) manufacturing defects, and uneven loading or amplitude of wheel OOR until 200 times compared to periodic non-roundness and creating
non-roundness braking forces on the wheel (Jing et al., 2022) random (non-constant) value for phase angel (Jing et al., 2022)- It can cause the train to vibrate and produce excessive noise (Jing et al., 2022)increased wear and tear on both the wheel and the track (Jing et al., 2022)
Wheel tread A discrete defect that happens when a Excessive braking force in comparison to - It causes impact vibration, which produces a spike that is approximately 4 times larger in
Flat, shelling, non- - Impact load - Field SVM, DNN Fault diagnosis (Krummenacher etGeneral defect Displacement Field BL Fault detection (Ni & Zhang, 2021)
Polygonization Acceleration Field GMPSO- Fault diagnosis (Xie et al., 2022)Polygonization Acceleration - Simulation QPSO-SVM Fault diagnosis (M. Xu & Yao,Polygonization Acceleration - Simulation QPSO-SVM Fault diagnosis (M. Xu & Yao,Flat, spalling Displacement Field NMF, MLP- Fault diagnosis (Wan et al., 2023)work on wheel OOR faults and machine learning-vibration based fault diagnostics. The characteristics,factors influencing, and operation effects (including vibration features) caused by wheel OOR faultswere given and examined in depth. The fault diagnosis methods, namely model-based, knowledgebased, and data-driven techniques was also described and deliberated. In-depth surveys of machinelearning approaches for diagnosing equipment failure were also provided. Machine learning-based faultdiagnosis is more capable, reliable, and accurate than other fault diagnosis methods such as statisticalbased fault diagnosis, perhaps even the best when compared to model- and knowledge-based faultdiagnosis. ML-based fault diagnosis could be used in complex and nonlinear systems and it is muchsimpler and easier to implement as it does not require system modelling. ML-based fault diagnosis isused to analyse data from equipment monitoring results. Whereas, wheel OOR faults have a significantrelationship to vertical vibration in railway vehicle operation. So, by integrating machine learningtechniques and vibration data, it is feasible to diagnose OOR faults in train wheel better and moreaccurately. Furthermore, the use of ML and vibration data may predict the failure and remaining usefullife of the train wheel. Current research for machine learning and vibration-based train wheel OORfailure diagnosis is still not well established, and more research needs to be done. The requirement fora large amount of data to create machine learning models is a challenge, because in the actual world,(unbalanced data). Furthermore, research into the application of machine learning-vibration techniques to identify several train wheel OOR faults is required to determine the optimal machine learning method.
This type of study can also include railway operator industries, increasing train wheel maintenance